---
title: Patch-Based Convolutional Neural Networks for Multiple Microstructural Features Detection in FIB-SEM Micrographs of Irradiated Nuclear Fuel
author: Jason Uwaeze
tags:
  - Scanning Electron Microscopy
  - Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy
  - Convolutional Neural Networks <br>
  - Semantic Segmentation
  - Nuclear Energy
---

This work introduces a new framework for identifying microstructures in irradiated U-10Zr (wt. %)
metallic fuel with limited annotated data. The framework includes the creation of a reliable
annotated dataset with paired SEM and ground truth data from EDS maps, the applications of
CNNs for microstructure identification, and the validation of model performance. We evaluate several models,
including Patch-based U-Net, Attention U-Net, and Residual U-Net, finding that patch-based U-Net exhibits superior segmentation performance and consistency. This approach reduces reliance on EDS detectors and aids in accelerating nuclear material analysis process, highlighting the
potential of advanced deep learning techniques to improve microstructural understanding in nuclear material.

[[Paper](https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/14/6/632)][[Code](https://github.com/Wazhee/Automatic-Multiple-Sclerosis-Lesion-Tracking)].

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/pbmc.png"
  caption="Framework for patch-based material characterization"
  width="1000px"
%}

Focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) tomography has increasingly been
utilized for acquiring three-dimensional (3D) microstructure features at the sub-micron scale in
irradiated nuclear materials. Despite its growing use, several challenges persist. These include the time-intensive nature of
data collection of EDS data, difficulties in distinguishing between various microstructures, and issues with image alignment. 
These challenges currently limit the broader application of FIB-SEM tomography in the field. To overcome these limitations, we propose using convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) to automate microstructure identification in SEM images. Our study introduces a new framework for identifying microstructures in 
irradiated U-10Zr (wt. %) metallic fuel with limited annotated data. The framework includes the creation of a reliable annotated dataset with paired SEM 
and ground truth data from EDS maps, the applications of CNNs for microstructure identification, and the validation of model performance. Specifically,
we employed the Segment Anything Model (SAM) to align SEM images with corresponding EDS maps and focused ion beam (FIB) tomography SEM data. We evaluate several models, including Patch-based U-Net, Attention U-Net, and Residual U-Net, finding that patch-based U- Net exhibits superior segmentation performance and consistency. 

The key contributions of this work include:
• Developing a new framework for data preparation in FIB-SEM tomography data.
Implementing PBCNNs for efficient segmentation of material microstructures in SEM
images.
• Performed a comprehensive analysis of state-of-the-art CNN-based SEM segmentation
method

Paper submitted to *Scientific Reports* (Nature) 2025, [Patch-Based Convolutional Neural Networks for Multiple Microstructural Features Detection in FIB-SEM Micrographs of Irradiated Nuclear Fuel](https://www.nature.com/srep/).

This work was supported by U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), INL Laboratory Directed Research & Development (LDRD)
Program under DOE Idaho Operations Office Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517 (tracking number:
23A1070-069FP, 24A1081-149FP, 25A1090-192FP). This research also made use of the resources of
the High Performance Computing (HPC) Center at Idaho National Laboratory, which is
supported by the Office of Nuclear Energy of the U.S. Department of Energy and the Nuclear
Science User Facilities.
